Technical Report – SARIMA Model for Time Series Forecasting

For this project, I used the SARIMA (Seasonal Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average) model to forecast passenger counts for local and school bus services. The data showed both trends and seasonal patterns, which made SARIMA a good choice since it can handle both aspects effectively.

Understanding the Model

SARIMA is basically an advanced version of ARIMA that also considers seasonality — meaning it looks at repeating patterns over fixed time periods (for example, weekly or monthly cycles).
The model is written as:

SARIMA(p, d, q)(P, D, Q, s)

Here’s what each part means:

p – how many past observations are used (autoregressive part)

d – how many times the data is differenced to remove trends

q – how many past forecast errors are used (moving average part)

P, D, Q – the same idea but for the seasonal part of the data

s – the length of one seasonal cycle (for example, 12 for monthly data)

Model Setup

I built the model using the SARIMAX function from the statsmodels library in Python.
After experimenting with a few parameter combinations, I found that (1,1,1)(1,1,1,12) gave the best results for my dataset.

model = SARIMAX(train, order=(1,1,1), seasonal_order=(1,1,1,12))
results = model.fit()


This setup helped capture both short-term changes and the overall monthly seasonality in the data.

Model Performance

To check how well the model performed, I used:

MAE (Mean Absolute Error) – measures average prediction error

RMSE (Root Mean Square Error) – gives more weight to large errors

For example, for the Local Route data:

MAE ≈ 7770.19

RMSE ≈ 8901.87

These numbers show that the model predicted the overall trend quite well, with small deviations during some seasonal peaks.

Why I Chose SARIMA

I picked SARIMA because:

It can model both trend and seasonality, which is common in transport data.

It works well for single-variable forecasting like passenger count.

It gives reliable future forecasts with confidence intervals.
